From Molecules to Organisms: Structures and Processes
HS-LS1-1 Construct an explanation based on evidence for how the structure of DNA determines the structure of proteins which carry out the essential functions of life through systems of specialized cells.
Introduction to the genetic code (B-I.1)
Protein synthesis: transcription (B-J.)
Protein synthesis: translation (B-J.)
Read a codon wheel (B-J.1)
Read a codon table (B-J.2)
Use a codon wheel to transcribe and translate DNA sequences (B-J.3)
Use a codon table to transcribe and translate DNA sequences (B-J.4)
HS-LS1-2 Develop and use a model to illustrate the hierarchical organization of interacting systems that provide specific functions within multicellular organisms.
Organization in the human body: the heart and the circulatory system (B-F.1)
HS-LS1-3 Plan and conduct an investigation to provide evidence that feedback mechanisms maintain homeostasis.
Homeostasis and feedback loops (B-F.2)
HS-LS1-4 Use a model to illustrate the role of cellular division (mitosis) and differentiation in producing and maintaining complex organisms.
Introduction to cell division (B-H.1)
The cell cycle (B-H.2)
Describe phases of mitosis and the cell cycle (B-H.3)
Identify phases of mitosis and the cell cycle in plant cells (B-H.4)
HS-LS1-5 Use a model to illustrate how photosynthesis transforms light energy into stored chemical energy.
The chemistry of photosynthesis (B-G.1)
HS-LS1-6 Construct and revise an explanation based on evidence for how carbon, hydrogen, and oxygen from sugar molecules may combine with other elements to form amino acids and/or other large carbon-based molecules.
Structure and function: carbohydrates (B-C.1)
Structure and function: lipids (B-C.2)
Structure and function: proteins (B-C.3)
Structure and function: nucleic acids (B-C.4)
Identify the structures and functions of biomolecules (B-C.5)
Compare the structures and functions of biomolecules (B-C.6)
HS-LS1-7 Use a model to illustrate that cellular respiration is a chemical process whereby the bonds of food molecules and oxygen molecules are broken and the bonds in new compounds are formed resulting in a net transfer of energy.
The chemistry of cellular respiration (B-G.2)
Ecosystems: Interactions, Energy, and Dynamics
HS-LS2-1 Use mathematical and/or computational representations to support explanations of factors that affect carrying capacity of ecosystems at different scales.
Patterns of population growth (B-O.4)
Factors affecting carrying capacity (B-O.)
Factors affecting Yellowstone bison population dynamics (B-O.)
HS-LS2-2 Use mathematical representations to support and revise explanations based on evidence about factors affecting biodiversity and populations in ecosystems of different scales.
Kelp forests: factors affecting biodiversity (B-P.1)
Lake biodiversity and eutrophication: explore a problem (B-P.)
HS-LS2-3 Construct and revise an explanation based on evidence for the cycling of matter and flow of energy in aerobic and anaerobic conditions.
Aerobic cellular respiration, anaerobic cellular respiration, and fermentation (B-G.)
HS-LS2-4 Use mathematical representations to support claims for the cycling of matter and flow of energy among organisms in an ecosystem.
Interpret a Serengeti food web (B-O.1)
Interpret an Antarctic food web (B-O.2)
Trophic levels and energy pyramids (B-O.)
HS-LS2-5 Develop a model to illustrate the role of photosynthesis and cellular respiration in the cycling of carbon among the biosphere, atmosphere, hydrosphere, and geosphere.
The carbon cycle: biosphere processes and interactions (B-O.3)
The carbon cycle: geosphere processes and interactions (B-O.)
HS-LS2-6 Evaluate the claims, evidence, and reasoning that the complex interactions in ecosystems maintain relatively consistent numbers and types of organisms in stable conditions, but changing conditions may result in a new ecosystem.
Ecological succession (B-O.)
HS-LS2-7 Design, evaluate, and refine a solution for reducing the impacts of human activities on the environment and biodiversity.
HS-LS2-8 Evaluate the evidence for the role of group behavior on individual and species' chances to survive and reproduce.
How can group behavior affect survival? Identify evidence to support a claim (B-O.5)
Heredity: Inheritance and Variation of Traits
HS-LS3-1 Ask questions to clarify relationships about the role of DNA and chromosomes in coding the instructions for characteristic traits passed from parents to offspring.
Structure and function: nucleic acids (B-C.4)
Introduction to the genetic code (B-I.1)
Protein synthesis: transcription (B-J.)
Protein synthesis: translation (B-J.)
HS-LS3-2 Make and defend a claim based on evidence that inheritable genetic variations may result from: (1) new genetic combinations through meiosis, (2) viable errors occurring during replication, and/or (3) mutations caused by environmental factors.
Gene mutations (B-J.)
Sexual reproduction and genetic variation: part I (B-K.1)
Sexual reproduction and genetic variation: part II (B-K.)
The phases of meiosis (B-K.)
HS-LS3-3 Apply concepts of statistics and probability to explain the variation and distribution of expressed traits in a population.
Genetics vocabulary: genotype and phenotype (B-L.1)
Genetics vocabulary: dominant and recessive (B-L.2)
Punnett squares: Mendelian inheritance (B-L.3)
Punnett squares: incomplete dominance and codominance (B-L.4)
Punnett squares: multiple alleles (B-L.5)
Biological Evolution: Unity and Diversity
HS-LS4-1 Communicate scientific information that common ancestry and biological evolution are supported by multiple lines of empirical evidence.
Evaluate fossil evidence of evolution (B-M.1)
Evaluate anatomical and molecular evidence of evolution (B-M.2)
HS-LS4-2 Construct an explanation based on evidence that the process of evolution primarily results from four factors: (1) the potential for a species to increase in number, (2) the heritable genetic variation of individuals in a species due to mutation and sexual reproduction, (3) competition for limited resources, and (4) the proliferation of those organisms that are better able to survive and reproduce in the environment.
Source analysis: Darwin’s theory of evolution by natural selection (B-M.)
HS-LS4-3 Apply concepts of statistics and probability to support explanations that organisms with an advantageous heritable trait tend to increase in proportion to organisms lacking this trait.
Construct explanations of natural selection (B-M.3)
HS-LS4-4 Construct an explanation based on evidence for how natural selection leads to adaptation of populations.
Construct explanations of natural selection (B-M.3)
HS-LS4-5 Evaluate the evidence supporting claims that changes in environmental conditions may result in: (1) increases in the number of individuals of some species, (2) the emergence of new species over time, and (3) the extinction of other species.
HS-LS4-6 Create or revise a simulation to test a solution to mitigate adverse impacts of human activity on biodiversity.

Structure and Properties of Matter
HS-PS1-1 Use the periodic table as a model to predict the relative properties of elements based on the patterns of electrons in the outermost energy level of atoms.
Introduction to the periodic table (Ch-D.)
History of the periodic table (Ch-D.)
Models of the atom (Ch-G.)
Count subatomic particles in atoms and ions (Ch-G.1)
Identify the electron configuration of an atom or ion (Ch-I.)
Periodic trends: Ionization energy (Ch-J.1)
Introduction to chemical bonding (Ch-K.1)
Determine which type of chemical bond can form (Ch-K.2)
HS-PS1-3 Plan and conduct an investigation to gather evidence to compare the structure of substances at the bulk scale to infer the strength of electrical forces between particles.
Predict the shape of a molecule using VSEPR theory (Ch-M.)
Use Lewis structures to predict molecular polarity (Ch-M.)
Explore intermolecular forces and kinetic energy in phase diagrams (Ch-N.1)
HS-PS1-8 Develop models to illustrate the changes in the composition of the nucleus of the atom and the energy released during the processes of fission, fusion, and radioactive decay.
Classify nuclear reactions (Ch-H.1)
Predict products and reactants in nuclear reactions (Ch-H.)
HS-PS2-6 Communicate scientific and technical information about why the molecular-level structure is important in the functioning of designed materials.
Classify and describe covalent substances, ionic compounds, and metals (Ch-K.)
Chemical Reactions
HS-PS1-2 Construct and revise an explanation for the outcome of a simple chemical reaction based on the outermost electron states of atoms, trends in the periodic table, and knowledge of the patterns of chemical properties.
Classify chemical reactions (Ch-Q.1)
Single replacement reactions (Ch-Q.)
Identify soluble and insoluble ionic compounds (Ch-Q.)
Double replacement reactions (Ch-Q.)
HS-PS1-4 Develop a model to illustrate that the release or absorption of energy from a chemical reaction system depends upon the changes in total bond energy.
Matter and energy transfer between a system and its surroundings (Ch-E.)
Identify exothermic and endothermic processes (Ch-E.1)
HS-PS1-5 Apply scientific principles and evidence to provide an explanation about the effects of changing the temperature or concentration of the reacting particles on the rate at which a reaction occurs.
Factors that affect reaction rate (Ch-U.1)
HS-PS1-6 Refine the design of a chemical system by specifying a change in conditions that would produce increased amounts of products at equilibrium.
Predict the equilibrium shift (Ch-V.1)
Identify the stresses that cause an equilibrium shift (Ch-V.)
HS-PS1-7 Use mathematical representations to support the claim that atoms, and therefore mass, are conserved during a chemical reaction.
Calculate molar mass (Ch-O.1)
Convert between mass and moles of a substance (Ch-O.2)
Convert between volume and moles of a gas at STP (Ch-O.)
Count atoms in chemical reactions using models (Ch-P.1)
Count atoms in chemical equations (Ch-P.2)
Balance chemical equations I (Ch-P.3)
Balance chemical equations II (Ch-P.)
Determine mole ratios (Ch-R.1)
Calculate the mass of a reactant or product (Ch-R.2)
Calculate the volume of a gaseous reactant or product at STP (Ch-R.3)
Identify a limiting reactant and calculate the amount of a product (Ch-R.)
Calculate the percent yield of a reaction (Ch-R.)
Energy
HS-PS3-1 Create a computational model to calculate the change in the energy of one component in a system when the change in energy of the other component(s) and energy flows in and out of the system are known.
Interpret heating curves (Ch-F.)
Calculations involving specific heat (Ch-F.1)
HS-PS3-2 Develop and use models to illustrate that energy at the macroscopic scale can be accounted for as a combination of energy associated with the motions of particles (objects) and energy associated with the relative position of particles (objects).
HS-PS3-4 Plan and conduct an investigation to provide evidence that the transfer of thermal energy when two components of different temperature are combined within a closed system results in a more uniform energy distribution among the components in the system (second law of thermodynamics).
Waves and Electromagnetic Radiation
HS-PS4-1 Use mathematical representations to support a claim regarding relationships among the frequency, wavelength, and speed of waves traveling in various media.
Properties of electromagnetic waves (Ch-I.)
HS-PS4-3 Evaluate the claims, evidence, and reasoning behind the idea that electromagnetic radiation can be described either by a wave model or a particle model, and that for some situations one model is more useful than the other.
The photoelectric effect and the particle nature of light (Ch-I.)
Atomic emission and absorption spectra (Ch-I.)
HS-PS4-4 Evaluate the validity and reliability of claims in published materials of the effects that different frequencies of electromagnetic radiation have when absorbed by matter.
Properties of electromagnetic waves (Ch-I.)

Motion and Stability: Forces and Interactions
HS-PS2-1 Analyze data to support the claim that Newton's second law of motion describes the mathematical relationship among the net force on a macroscopic object, its mass, and its acceleration.
Newton's laws of motion (Ph-F.1)
Newton's first law of motion (Ph-F.2)
Newton's second law of motion (Ph-F.3)
HS-PS2-2 Use mathematical representations to support the claim that the total momentum of a system of objects is conserved when there is no net force on the system.
Conservation of momentum (Ph-G.1)
HS-PS2-3 Apply scientific and engineering ideas to design, evaluate, and refine a device that minimizes the force on a macroscopic object during a collision.
HS-PS2-4 Use mathematical representations of Newton's Law of Gravitation and Coulomb's Law to describe and predict the gravitational and electrostatic forces between objects.
Newton's law of universal gravitation (Ph-I.2)
Coulomb's law: electrostatic forces (Ph-P.1)
HS-PS2-5 Plan and conduct an investigation to provide evidence that an electric current can produce a magnetic field and that a changing magnetic field can produce an electric current.
Magnets and magnetism (Ph-R.1)
Magnetic field calculations: solenoids (Ph-R.)
Energy
HS-PS3-1 Create a computational model to calculate the change in the energy of one component in a system when the change in energy of the other component(s) and energy flows in and out of the system are known.
Conservation of mechanical energy (Ph-H.1)
HS-PS3-2 Develop and use models to illustrate that energy at the macroscopic scale can be accounted for as a combination of energy associated with the motions of particles (objects) and energy associated with the relative position of particles (objects).
Conservation of mechanical energy (Ph-H.1)
HS-PS3-3 Design, build, and refine a device that works within given constraints to convert one form of energy into another form of energy.
HS-PS3-4 Plan and conduct an investigation to provide evidence that the transfer of thermal energy when two components of different temperature are combined within a closed system results in a more uniform energy distribution among the components in the system (second law of thermodynamics).
HS-PS3-5 Develop and use a model of two objects interacting through electric or magnetic fields to illustrate the forces between objects and the changes in energy of the objects due to the interaction.
Coulomb's law: electrostatic forces (Ph-P.1)
Magnetic field calculations: long, straight wires (Ph-R.)
Waves and Their Applications in Technologies for Information Transfer
HS-PS4-1 Use mathematical representations to support a claim regarding relationships among the frequency, wavelength, and speed of waves traveling in various media.
Waves on strings (Ph-L.1)
Sound waves: speed, frequency, and wavelength (Ph-M.)
Properties of electromagnetic waves (Ph-N.1)
Refraction of light (Ph-O.)
HS-PS4-2 Evaluate questions about the advantages of using a digital transmission and storage of information.
HS-PS4-3 Evaluate the claims, evidence, and reasoning behind the idea that electromagnetic radiation can be described either by a wave model or a particle model, and that for some situations one model is more useful than the other.
HS-PS4-4 Evaluate the validity and reliability of claims in published materials of the effects that different frequencies of electromagnetic radiation have when absorbed by matter.
HS-PS4-5 Communicate technical information about how some technological devices use the principles of wave behavior and wave interactions with matter to transmit and capture information and energy.