LS Life Sciences
Matter and Energy in Organisms and Ecosystems
MS-LS1-6 Construct a scientific explanation based on evidence for the role of photosynthesis in the cycling of matter and flow of energy into and out of organisms.
How do plants use and change energy? (7-V.1)
Identify the photosynthetic organism (7-V.2)
MS-LS1-7 Develop a model to describe how food is rearranged through chemical reactions forming new molecules that support growth and/or release energy as this matter moves through an organism.
The chemistry of cellular respiration (7-O.2)
MS-LS2-1 Analyze and interpret data to provide evidence for the effects of resource availability on organisms and populations of organisms in an ecosystem.
Use food chains to predict changes in populations (7-X.4)
MS-LS2-3 Develop a model to describe the cycling of matter and flow of energy among living and nonliving parts of an ecosystem.
How does matter move in food chains? (7-X.1)
Interpret food webs I (7-X.2)
Interpret food webs II (7-X.3)
The carbon cycle (7-DD.4)
MS-LS2-4 Construct an argument supported by empirical evidence that changes to physical or biological components of an ecosystem affect populations.
Use food chains to predict changes in populations (7-X.4)
Investigate primary succession on a volcanic island (7-X.6)
Coral reef biodiversity and human uses: explore a problem (7-Y.1)
Interdependent Relationships in Ecosystems
MS-LS2-2 Construct an explanation that predicts patterns of interactions among organisms across multiple ecosystems.
Classify ecological relationships (7-X.)
Classify symbiotic relationships (7-X.5)
MS-LS2-5 Evaluate competing design solutions for maintaining biodiversity and ecosystem services.
Coral reef biodiversity and human uses: explore a problem (7-Y.1)
Coral reef biodiversity and human uses: evaluate solutions (7-Y.2)
ESS Earth and Space Systems
History of Earth
MS-ESS2-2 Construct an explanation based on evidence for how geoscience processes have changed Earth's surface at varying time and spatial scales.
How do rock layers form? (7-AA.4)
Label Earth layers (7-BB.1)
Label Earth features at tectonic plate boundaries (7-BB.2)
Describe tectonic plate boundaries around the world (7-BB.3)
MS-ESS2-3 Analyze and interpret data on the distribution of fossils and rocks, continental shapes, and seafloor structures to provide evidence of the past plate motions.
Evidence of continental drift and plate tectonics (7-BB.)
Label Earth features at tectonic plate boundaries (7-BB.2)
Describe tectonic plate boundaries around the world (7-BB.3)
Earth's Systems
MS-ESS2-1 Develop a model to describe the cycling of Earth's materials and the flow of energy that drives this process.
Introduction to the rock cycle (7-AA.2)
Classify rocks as igneous, sedimentary, or metamorphic (7-AA.3)
Label parts of rock cycle diagrams (7-AA.5)
Select parts of rock cycle diagrams (7-AA.6)
MS-ESS3-1 Construct a scientific explanation based on evidence for how the uneven distributions of Earth's mineral, energy, and groundwater resources are the result of past and current geoscience processes.
Petroleum formation and distribution on Earth (7-Z.)
Renewable and nonrenewable energy resources (7-Z.)
Human Impacts
MS-ESS3-2 Analyze and interpret data on natural hazards to forecast future catastrophic events and inform the development of technologies to mitigate their effects.
Analyze natural hazard maps (7-GG.1)
PS Physical Sciences
Structure and Properties of Matter
MS-PS1-1 Develop models to describe the atomic composition of simple molecules and extended structures.
How are substances represented by chemical formulas and models? (7-E.2)
Identify chemical formulas for ball-and-stick models (7-E.3)
Describe the atomic composition of molecules (7-E.4)
Classify elements and compounds using chemical formulas (7-E.5)
Classify elements and compounds using models (7-E.6)
MS-PS1-3 Gather and make sense of information to describe that synthetic materials come from natural resources and impact society.
Synthetic materials (7-F.8)
MS-PS1-4 Develop a model that predicts and describes changes in particle motion, temperature, and state of a pure substance when thermal energy is added or removed.
How does particle motion affect temperature? (7-K.1)
Particle motion and changes of state (7-K.2)
How does particle motion affect gas pressure? (7-K.3)
Identify how particle motion affects temperature and pressure (7-K.4)
Chemical Reactions
MS-PS1-2 Analyze and interpret data on the properties of substances before and after the substances interact to determine if a chemical reaction has occurred.
Compare physical and chemical changes (7-F.5)
Explore chemical structure and properties: soapmaking (7-F.6)
Explore chemical structure and properties: food flavors (7-F.7)
Synthetic materials (7-F.8)
MS-PS1-5 Develop and use a model to describe how the total number of atoms does not change in a chemical reaction and thus mass is conserved.
Count atoms and molecules in chemical reactions (7-F.2)
Calculate amounts of reactants or products in chemical reactions (7-F.3)
MS-PS1-6 Undertake a design project to construct, test, and modify a device that either releases or absorbs thermal energy by chemical processes.
Describe energy changes in chemical reactions (7-F.4)
ETS Engineering, Technology, and Applications of Science
Engineering Design
MS-ETS1-1 Define the criteria and constraints of a design problem with sufficient precision to ensure a successful solution, taking into account relevant scientific principles and potential impacts on people and the natural environment that may limit possible solutions.
Identify parts of the engineering-design process (7-C.1)
Explore the engineering-design process: going to the Moon! (7-C.4)
Coral reef biodiversity and human uses: evaluate solutions (7-Y.2)
MS-ETS1-2 Evaluate competing design solutions using a systematic process to determine how well they meet the criteria and constraints of the problem.
Identify parts of the engineering-design process (7-C.1)
Evaluate tests of engineering-design solutions (7-C.2)
Explore the engineering-design process: going to the Moon! (7-C.4)
Coral reef biodiversity and human uses: evaluate solutions (7-Y.2)
MS-ETS1-3 Analyze data from tests to determine similarities and differences among several design solutions to identify the best characteristics of each that can be combined into a new solution to better meet the criteria for success.
Use data from tests to compare engineering-design solutions (7-C.3)
Coral reef biodiversity and human uses: evaluate solutions (7-Y.2)
MS-ETS1-4 Develop a model to generate data for iterative testing and modification of a proposed object, tool, or process such that an optimal design can be achieved.
Explore the engineering-design process: going to the Moon! (7-C.4)