Inheritance and Variation of Traits: Life Cycles and Traits
3-LS1-1 Develop models to describe that organisms have unique and diverse life cycles but all have in common birth, growth, reproduction, and death.
Read animal life cycle diagrams (3-L.1)
Construct animal life cycle diagrams (3-L.2)
Compare stages of an animal's life cycle (3-L.3)
Compare different animals' life cycles (3-L.4)
Read and construct flowering plant life cycle diagrams (3-M.4)
How do flowering plants make new plants? (3-M.5)
3-LS3-1 Analyze and interpret data to provide evidence that plants and animals have traits inherited from parents and that variation of these traits exists in a group of similar organisms.
Match offspring to parents using inherited traits (3-P.1)
Identify inherited and acquired traits (3-P.2)
Read a plant pedigree chart (3-P.4)
Read an animal pedigree chart (3-P.5)
3-LS3-2 Use evidence to support the explanation that traits can be influenced by the environment.
What affects traits? Use observations to support a hypothesis (3-N.2)
Inherited and acquired traits: use evidence to support a statement (3-P.3)
3-LS4-2 Use evidence to construct an explanation for how the variations in characteristics among individuals of the same species may provide advantages in surviving, finding mates, and reproducing.
Interdependent Relationships in Ecosystems
3-LS2-1 Construct an argument that some animals form groups that help members survive.
Benefits of group behavior: North American caribou (3-L.5)
Benefits of group behavior: African wild dogs (3-L.6)
Benefits of group behavior: leaf-cutter ants (3-L.7)
3-LS4-1 Analyze and interpret data from fossils to provide evidence of the organisms and the environments in which they lived long ago.
Introduction to fossils (3-S.1)
Compare fossils to modern organisms (3-S.2)
Compare ancient and modern organisms: use observations to support a hypothesis (3-S.3)
3-LS4-3 Construct an argument with evidence that in a particular habitat some organisms can survive well, some survive less well, and some cannot survive at all.
Introduction to adaptations (3-O.1)
Animal adaptations: beaks, mouths, and necks (3-O.2)
Animal adaptations: feet and limbs (3-O.3)
Animal adaptations: skins and body coverings (3-O.4)
Identify ecosystems (3-Q.1)
Describe ecosystems (3-Q.2)
3-LS4-4 Make a claim about the merit of a solution to a problem caused when the environment changes and the types of plants and animals that live there may change.
Weather and Climate
3-ESS2-1 Represent data in tables and graphical displays to describe typical weather conditions expected during a particular season.
Read a thermometer (3-T.1)
Compare temperatures on thermometers (3-T.2)
Collect and graph temperature data (3-T.3)
Use climate data to make predictions (3-T.7)
Use data to describe U.S. climates (3-T.8)
Use data to describe world climates (3-T.9)
3-ESS2-2 Obtain and combine information to describe climates in different regions of the world.
What's the difference between weather and climate? (3-T.4)
Weather and climate around the world (3-T.5)
Weather or climate? Cite text (3-T.6)
Use climate data to make predictions (3-T.7)
Use data to describe U.S. climates (3-T.8)
Use data to describe world climates (3-T.9)
3-ESS3-1 Make a claim about the merit of a design solution that reduces the impacts of a weather-related hazard.
Evaluate multiple design solutions to prevent flooding (3-X.3)
Identify the best design solution to prevent hurricane damage (3-X.4)
Forces and Interactions
3-PS2-1 Plan and conduct an investigation to provide evidence of the effects of balanced and unbalanced forces on the motion of an object.
Identify pushes and pulls (3-G.1)
How do balanced and unbalanced forces affect motion? (3-G.2)
How do mass and force affect motion? (3-G.3)
3-PS2-2 Make observations and/or measurements of an object's motion to provide evidence that a pattern can be used to predict future motion.
3-PS2-3 Ask questions to determine cause and effect relationships of electric or magnetic interactions between two objects not in contact with each other.
Introduction to static electricity and charged objects (3-I.1)
Identify magnets that attract or repel (3-J.1)
Label magnets that attract or repel (3-J.2)
Compare strengths of magnetic forces (3-J.3)
3-PS2-4 Define a simple design problem that can be solved by applying scientific ideas about magnets.
Solve problems using magnets (3-X.1)
Engineering Design
3-5-ETS1-1 Define a simple design problem reflecting a need or a want that includes specified criteria for success and constraints on materials, time, or cost.
Identify the best design solution to prevent hurricane damage (3-X.4)
3-5-ETS1-2 Generate and compare multiple possible solutions to a problem based on how well each is likely to meet the criteria and constraints of the problem.
Evaluate multiple design solutions to prevent erosion (3-X.2)
Evaluate multiple design solutions to prevent flooding (3-X.3)
Identify the best design solution to prevent hurricane damage (3-X.4)
3-5-ETS1-3 Plan and carry out fair tests in which variables are controlled and failure points are considered to identify aspects of a model or prototype that can be improved.