From Molecules to Organisms: Structures and Processes
1-LS1-1 Use materials to design a solution to a human problem by mimicking how plants and/or animals use their external parts to help them survive, grow, and meet their needs.
How do animals use their body parts? (1-H.2)
Identify plant parts (1-I.2)
Identify what plant parts do (1-I.3)
Design knee pads (1-P.)
1-LS1-2 Read texts and use media to determine patterns in behavior of parents and offspring that help offspring survive.
Heredity: Inheritance and Variation of Traits
1-LS3-1 Make observations to construct an evidence-based account that young plants and animals are like, but not exactly like, their parents.
Match animals to their parents (1-H.3)
Match plants to their parents (1-I.4)
Compare young living things to their parents (1-J.4)
Earth's Place in the Universe
1-ESS1-1 Use observations of the sun, moon, and stars to describe patterns that can be predicted.
The daytime sky (1-O.1)
The night sky (1-O.2)
1-ESS1-2 Make observations at different times of year to relate the amount of daylight to the time of year.
Seasonal daylight patterns (1-O.)
Waves and Their Applications in Technologies for Information Transfer
1-PS4-1 Plan and conduct investigations to provide evidence that vibrating materials can make sound and that sound can make materials vibrate.
1-PS4-2 Make observations to construct an evidence-based account that objects in darkness can be seen only when illuminated.
More light or less light (1-F.1)
1-PS4-3 Plan and conduct an investigation to determine the effect of placing objects made with different materials in the path of a beam of light.
Investigate shadows (1-F.2)
Which lets light go through? (1-F.3)
1-PS4-4 Use tools and materials to design and build a device that uses light or sound to solve the problem of communicating over a distance.
How do we use light and sound to communicate? (1-F.4)
Engineering Design
K-2-ETS1-1 Ask questions, make observations, and gather information about a situation people want to change to define a simple problem that can be solved through the development of a new or improved object or tool.
Design a race car track (1-P.1)
Design a sunshade (1-P.2)
Design knee pads (1-P.)
K-2-ETS1-2 Develop a simple sketch, drawing, or physical model to illustrate how the shape of an object helps it function as needed to solve a given problem.
Design a race car track (1-P.1)
Design a sunshade (1-P.2)
K-2-ETS1-3 Analyze data from tests of two objects designed to solve the same problem to compare the strengths and weaknesses of how each performs.
Design a race car track (1-P.1)
Design a sunshade (1-P.2)
Design knee pads (1-P.)