Matter and Energy in Organisms and Ecosystems
5-PS3-1 Use models to describe that energy in animals' food (used for body repair, growth, motion, and to maintain body warmth) was once energy from the sun.
Body systems: digestion (5-M.5)
How do plants make food? (5-N.3)
Identify the photosynthetic organism (5-N.7)
Identify roles in food chains (5-R.3)
How does matter move in food chains? (5-R.4)
5-LS1-1 Support an argument that plants get the materials they need for growth chiefly from air and water.
How do plants make food? (5-N.3)
5-LS2-1 Develop a model to describe the movement of matter among plants, animals, decomposers, and the environment.
How do plants make food? (5-N.3)
Identify roles in food chains (5-R.3)
How does matter move in food chains? (5-R.4)
Interpret food webs I (5-R.5)
Interpret food webs II (5-R.6)
Space Systems: Stars and the Solar System
5-PS2-1 Support an argument that the gravitational force exerted by Earth on objects is directed down.
5-ESS1-1 Support an argument that differences in the apparent brightness of the sun compared to other stars is due to their relative distances from Earth.
Brightness of the Sun and other stars (5-Y.4)
5-ESS1-2 Represent data in graphical displays to reveal patterns of daily changes in length and direction of shadows, day and night, and the seasonal appearance of some stars in the night sky.
Shadows (5-Y.1)
Earth's rotation and orbit (5-Y.2)
Day and night (5-Y.3)
Constellations and the changing night sky (5-Y.5)
Earth's Systems
5-ESS2-1 Develop a model using an example to describe ways the geosphere, biosphere, hydrosphere, and/or atmosphere interact.
Label parts of rock cycle diagrams (5-T.6)
Select parts of rock cycle diagrams (5-T.7)
Label parts of water cycle diagrams (5-W.2)
Select parts of water cycle diagrams (5-W.3)
Describe the geosphere, biosphere, hydrosphere, and atmosphere (5-W.4)
5-ESS2-2 Describe and graph the amounts and percentages of water and fresh water in various reservoirs to provide evidence about the distribution of water on Earth.
Describe and graph water on Earth (5-W.1)
5-ESS3-1 Obtain and combine information about ways individual communities use science ideas to protect the Earth's resources and environment.
Science literacy: how can a community protect sea turtles? (5-S.1)
Structure and Properties of Matter
5-PS1-1 Develop a model to describe that matter is made of particles too small to be seen.
Particles of matter (5-B.)
5-PS1-2 Measure and graph quantities to provide evidence that regardless of the type of change that occurs when heating, cooling, or mixing substances, the total weight of matter is conserved.
Understand conservation of matter using graphs (5-B.2)
5-PS1-3 Make observations and measurements to identify materials based on their properties.
Compare properties of objects (5-A.1)
5-PS1-4 Conduct an investigation to determine whether the mixing of two or more substances results in new substances.
Compare physical and chemical changes (5-D.1)
Engineering Design
3-5-ETS1-1 Define a simple design problem reflecting a need or a want that includes specified criteria for success and constraints on materials, time, or cost.
Identify the best design solution to prevent hurricane damage (5-Z.2)
3-5-ETS1-2 Generate and compare multiple possible solutions to a problem based on how well each is likely to meet the criteria and constraints of the problem.
Evaluate multiple design solutions to prevent flooding (5-Z.1)
Identify the best design solution to prevent hurricane damage (5-Z.2)
3-5-ETS1-3 Plan and carry out fair tests in which variables are controlled and failure points are considered to identify aspects of a model or prototype that can be improved.