LS Life Sciences
Structure, Function, and Information Processing
MS-LS1-1 Conduct an investigation to provide evidence that living things are made of cells, either one cell or many different numbers and types of cells.
Understanding cells (6-P.1)
MS-LS1-2 Develop and use a model to describe the function of a cell as a whole and ways parts of cells contribute to the function.
Understanding cells (6-P.1)
Identify functions of plant cell parts (6-P.2)
Identify functions of animal cell parts (6-P.3)
Plant cell diagrams: label parts (6-P.4)
Animal cell diagrams: label parts (6-P.5)
Compare cells and cell parts (6-P.6)
MS-LS1-3 Use argument supported by evidence for how the body is a system of interacting subsystems composed of groups of cells.
Organization in the human body (6-Q.1)
MS-LS1-8 Gather and synthesize information that sensory receptors respond to stimuli by sending messages to the brain for immediate behavior or storage as memories.
Body systems: perception and motion (6-Q.5)
Science literacy: how does the nervous system produce phantom pain? (6-Q.6)
Growth, Development, and Reproduction of Organisms
MS-LS1-4 Use argument based on empirical evidence and scientific reasoning to support an explanation for how characteristic animal behaviors and specialized plant structures affect the probability of successful reproduction of animals and plants respectively.
How can animal behaviors affect reproductive success? Identify evidence to support a claim (6-S.1)
MS-LS1-5 Construct a scientific explanation based on evidence for how environmental and genetic factors influence the growth of organisms.
Inherited and acquired traits: use evidence to support a statement (6-R.1)
How do genes and the environment affect plant growth? (6-R.9)
MS-LS3-2 Develop and use a model to describe why asexual reproduction results in offspring with identical genetic information and sexual reproduction results in offspring with genetic variation.
Mitosis and the cell cycle (6-P.7)
Genetic variation in sexual reproduction (6-R.2)
Genetics vocabulary: genotype and phenotype (6-R.3)
Genetics vocabulary: dominant and recessive (6-R.4)
Complete and interpret Punnett squares (6-R.5)
Use Punnett squares to calculate ratios of offspring types (6-R.6)
Flowering plant and conifer life cycles (6-U.1)
Moss and fern life cycles (6-U.2)
ESS Earth and Space Systems
Earth's Systems
MS-ESS2-4 Develop a model to describe the cycling of water through Earth's systems driven by energy from the sun and the force of gravity.
Label parts of water cycle diagrams (6-DD.2)
Select parts of water cycle diagrams (6-DD.3)
Weather and Climate
MS-ESS2-5 Collect data to provide evidence for how the motions and complex interactions of air masses results in changes in weather conditions.
Explore air masses (6-EE.1)
Identify and compare air masses (6-EE.2)
How do air masses form? (6-EE.3)
MS-ESS2-6 Develop and use a model to describe how unequal heating and rotation of the Earth cause patterns of atmospheric and oceanic circulation that determine regional climates.
Factors affecting climate: latitude (6-FF.4)
Factors affecting climate: altitude (6-FF.5)
Factors affecting climate: distance from the ocean (6-FF.6)
Factors affecting climate: surface ocean currents (6-FF.7)
MS-ESS3-5 Ask questions to clarify evidence of the factors that have caused the rise in global temperatures over the past century.
Evaluate claims about natural resource use: fossil fuels (6-Z.2)
The carbon cycle (6-DD.4)
The greenhouse effect (6-EE.4)
Human Impacts
MS-ESS3-3 Apply scientific principles to design a method for monitoring and minimizing a human impact on the environment.
Coral reef biodiversity and human uses: explore a problem (6-Y.1)
Coral reef biodiversity and human uses: evaluate solutions (6-Y.2)
PS Physical Sciences
Energy
MS-PS3-3 Apply scientific principles to design, construct, and test a device that either minimizes or maximizes thermal energy transfer.
Predict heat flow and temperature changes (6-J.1)
Compare thermal energy transfers (6-J.3)
MS-PS3-4 Plan an investigation to determine the relationships among the energy transferred, the type of matter, the mass, and the change in the average kinetic energy of the particles as measured by the temperature of the sample.
How does particle motion affect temperature? (6-K.1)
MS-PS3-5 Construct, use, and present arguments to support the claim that when the kinetic energy of an object changes, energy is transferred to or from the object.
Explore energy transformations: roller coaster ride (6-H.3)
Explore energy transformations: bike ride (6-H.4)
ETS Engineering, Technology, and Applications of Science
Engineering Design
MS-ETS1-1 Define the criteria and constraints of a design problem with sufficient precision to ensure a successful solution, taking into account relevant scientific principles and potential impacts on people and the natural environment that may limit possible solutions.
Identify parts of the engineering-design process (6-C.1)
Explore the engineering-design process: going to the Moon! (6-C.4)
Coral reef biodiversity and human uses: evaluate solutions (6-Y.2)
MS-ETS1-2 Evaluate competing design solutions using a systematic process to determine how well they meet the criteria and constraints of the problem.
Identify parts of the engineering-design process (6-C.1)
Evaluate tests of engineering-design solutions (6-C.2)
Explore the engineering-design process: going to the Moon! (6-C.4)
Coral reef biodiversity and human uses: evaluate solutions (6-Y.2)
MS-ETS1-3 Analyze data from tests to determine similarities and differences among several design solutions to identify the best characteristics of each that can be combined into a new solution to better meet the criteria for success.
Use data from tests to compare engineering-design solutions (6-C.3)
Coral reef biodiversity and human uses: evaluate solutions (6-Y.2)
MS-ETS1-4 Develop a model to generate data for iterative testing and modification of a proposed object, tool, or process such that an optimal design can be achieved.
Explore the engineering-design process: going to the Moon! (6-C.4)