LS Life Sciences
Growth, Development, and Reproduction of Organisms
MS-LS3-1 Develop and use a model to describe why structural changes to genes (mutations) located on chromosomes may affect proteins and may result in harmful, beneficial, or neutral effects to the structure and function of the organism.
Genes, proteins, and traits: understanding the genetic code (8-R.8)
Describe the effects of gene mutations on organisms (8-R.9)
MS-LS4-5 Gather and synthesize information about the technologies that have changed the way humans influence the inheritance of desired traits in organisms.
Natural Selection and Adaptations
MS-LS4-1 Analyze and interpret data for patterns in the fossil record that document the existence, diversity, extinction, and change of life forms throughout the history of life on Earth under the assumption that natural laws operate today as in the past.
Compare ages of fossils in a rock sequence (8-T.2)
MS-LS4-2 Apply scientific ideas to construct an explanation for the anatomical similarities and differences among modern organisms and between modern and fossil organisms to infer evolutionary relationships.
Compare fossils to modern organisms (8-T.1)
MS-LS4-3 Analyze displays of pictorial data to compare patterns of similarities in the embryological development across multiple species to identify relationships not evident in the fully formed anatomy.
MS-LS4-4 Construct an explanation based on evidence that describes how genetic variations of traits in a population increase some individuals' probability of surviving and reproducing in a specific environment.
Introduction to natural selection (8-S.2)
Construct explanations of natural selection (8-S.5)
MS-LS4-6 Use mathematical representations to support explanations of how natural selection may lead to increases and decreases of specific traits in populations over time.
Calculate the percentages of traits in a population (8-S.3)
Calculate the averages of traits in a population (8-S.4)
Construct explanations of natural selection (8-S.5)
ESS Earth and Space Systems
Space Systems
MS-ESS1-1 Develop and use a model of the Earth-sun-moon system to describe the cyclic patterns of lunar phases, eclipses of the sun and moon, and seasons.
Analyze models of the Earth-Sun-Moon system (8-HH.1)
Identify phases of the Moon (8-HH.2)
Solar eclipses (8-HH.3)
Lunar eclipses (8-HH.4)
What causes the seasons on Earth? (8-HH.5)
MS-ESS1-2 Develop and use a model to describe the role of gravity in the motions within galaxies and the solar system.
Gravity and its role in the universe (8-HH.)
MS-ESS1-3 Analyze and interpret data to determine scale properties of objects in the solar system.
Identify objects in the solar system (8-HH.)
Analyze data to compare properties of planets (8-HH.6)
History of Earth
MS-ESS1-4 Construct a scientific explanation based on evidence from rock strata for how the geologic time scale is used to organize Earth's 4.6-billion-year-old history.
Compare ages of fossils in a rock sequence (8-T.2)
Human Impacts
MS-ESS3-4 Construct an argument supported by evidence for how increases in human population and per-capita consumption of natural resources impact Earth's systems.
Evaluate claims about natural resource use: groundwater (8-Z.1)
Evaluate claims about natural resource use: fossil fuels (8-Z.2)
PS Physical Sciences
Forces and Interactions
MS-PS2-1 Apply Newton's Third Law to design a solution to a problem involving the motion of two colliding objects.
Predict forces using Newton’s third law of motion (8-G.8)
Newton's laws of motion (8-G.)
Collisions and car safety features (8-G.10)
MS-PS2-2 Plan an investigation to provide evidence that the change in an object's motion depends on the sum of the forces on the object and the mass of the object.
Identify whether objects are accelerating (8-G.6)
How does mass affect force and acceleration? (8-G.7)
Calculate acceleration using Newton’s second law of motion (8-G.)
Balanced and unbalanced forces (8-G.9)
MS-PS2-3 Ask questions about data to determine the factors that affect the strength of electric and magnetic forces.
Electric forces and fields (8-I.1)
Magnetic forces and fields (8-I.2)
Compare magnitudes of magnetic forces (8-I.3)
MS-PS2-4 Construct and present arguments using evidence to support the claim that gravitational interactions are attractive and depend on the masses of interacting objects.
MS-PS2-5 Conduct an investigation and evaluate the experimental design to provide evidence that fields exist between objects exerting forces on each other even though the objects are not in contact.
Electric forces and fields (8-I.1)
Magnetic forces and fields (8-I.2)
Compare magnitudes of magnetic forces (8-I.3)
Energy
MS-PS3-1 Construct and interpret graphical displays of data to describe the relationships of kinetic energy to the mass of an object and to the speed of an object.
Use tables and graphs to identify patterns about kinetic energy (8-H.2)
MS-PS3-2 Develop a model to describe that when the arrangement of objects interacting at a distance changes, different amounts of potential energy are stored in the system.
Identify changes in gravitational potential energy (8-H.1)
Waves and Electromagnetic Radiation
MS-PS4-1 Use mathematical representations to describe a simple model for waves that includes how the amplitude of a wave is related to the energy in a wave.
Transverse waves (8-L.1)
Longitudinal waves (8-L.2)
Sound waves (8-L.)
Compare amplitudes, wavelengths, and frequencies of waves (8-L.3)
Compare energy of waves (8-L.4)
MS-PS4-2 Develop and use a model to describe that waves are reflected, absorbed, or transmitted through various materials.
Transmission, reflection, and absorption of waves (8-L.5)
MS-PS4-3 Integrate qualitative scientific and technical information to support the claim that digitized signals are a more reliable way to encode and transmit information than analog signals.
ETS Engineering, Technology, and Applications of Science
Engineering Design
MS-ETS1-1 Define the criteria and constraints of a design problem with sufficient precision to ensure a successful solution, taking into account relevant scientific principles and potential impacts on people and the natural environment that may limit possible solutions.
Identify parts of the engineering-design process (8-C.1)
Explore the engineering-design process: going to the Moon! (8-C.4)
Coral reef biodiversity and human uses: evaluate solutions (8-Y.2)
MS-ETS1-2 Evaluate competing design solutions using a systematic process to determine how well they meet the criteria and constraints of the problem.
Identify parts of the engineering-design process (8-C.1)
Evaluate tests of engineering-design solutions (8-C.2)
Explore the engineering-design process: going to the Moon! (8-C.4)
Coral reef biodiversity and human uses: evaluate solutions (8-Y.2)
MS-ETS1-3 Analyze data from tests to determine similarities and differences among several design solutions to identify the best characteristics of each that can be combined into a new solution to better meet the criteria for success.
Use data from tests to compare engineering-design solutions (8-C.3)
Coral reef biodiversity and human uses: evaluate solutions (8-Y.2)
MS-ETS1-4 Develop a model to generate data for iterative testing and modification of a proposed object, tool, or process such that an optimal design can be achieved.
Explore the engineering-design process: going to the Moon! (8-C.4)