Ecosystems: Interactions, Energy, and Dynamics
2-LS2-1 Plan and conduct an investigation to determine if plants need sunlight and water to grow.
2-LS2-2 Develop a simple model that mimics the function of an animal in dispersing seeds or pollinating plants.
How do flowering plants make new plants? (2-K.4)
Pollinator: ruby-throated hummingbird (2-M.9)
Pollinator: Indian flying fox (2-M.10)
Pollinator: painted lady butterfly (2-M.11)
Seed disperser: Eurasian red squirrel (2-M.12)
Seed disperser: African elephant (2-M.13)
Seed disperser: common ostrich (2-M.14)
Biological Evolution: Unity and Diversity
2-LS4-1 Make observations of plants and animals to compare the diversity of life in different habitats.
Identify plants and animals (2-I.2)
Identify mammals, birds, fish, reptiles, and amphibians (2-I.3)
Identify animals with and without backbones (2-I.4)
Observe traits (2-L.1)
Observe and compare traits (2-L.2)
Earth's Systems: Processes that Shape the Earth
2-ESS1-1 Use information from several sources to provide evidence that Earth events can occur quickly or slowly.
Classify changes to Earth's surface (2-R.1)
Find evidence of changes to Earth's surface (2-R.2)
Changes to Earth's surface: earthquakes (2-R.3)
Changes to Earth's surface: volcanic eruptions (2-R.4)
Changes to Earth's surface: erosion (2-R.5)
Evaluate multiple design solutions to prevent erosion (2-S.1)
2-ESS2-1 Compare multiple solutions designed to slow or prevent wind or water from changing the shape of the land.
Changes to Earth's surface: erosion (2-R.5)
Evaluate multiple design solutions to prevent erosion (2-S.1)
2-ESS2-2 Develop a model to represent the shapes and kinds of land and bodies of water in an area.
Water on Earth (2-Q.2)
Identify Earth's land features (2-Q.4)
2-ESS2-3 Obtain information to identify where water is found on Earth and that it can be solid or liquid.
Bodies of water (2-Q.1)
Water on Earth (2-Q.2)
Structure and Properties of Matter
2-PS1-1 Plan and conduct an investigation to describe and classify different kinds of materials by their observable properties.
Identify properties of an object (2-A.1)
Compare properties of objects (2-A.2)
Compare properties of materials (2-A.3)
Classify matter as solid or liquid (2-B.1)
Identify solids and liquids (2-B.2)
2-PS1-2 Analyze data obtained from testing different materials to determine which materials have the properties that are best suited for an intended purpose.
Compare properties of materials (2-A.3)
Identify materials in objects (2-A.4)
2-PS1-3 Make observations to construct an evidence-based account of how an object made of a small set of pieces can be disassembled and made into a new object.
Identify multiple materials in objects (2-A.5)
2-PS1-4 Construct an argument with evidence that some changes caused by heating or cooling can be reversed and some cannot.
Changes caused by heating and cooling (2-C.1)
Change-of-state diagrams: solid and liquid (2-C.2)
Change-of-state diagrams: liquid and gas (2-C.3)
Change-of-state diagrams: solid, liquid, and gas (2-C.4)
Heating, cooling, and changes of state: melting and freezing (2-C.5)
Heating, cooling, and changes of state: evaporating and condensing (2-C.6)
Engineering Design
K-2-ETS1-1 Ask questions, make observations, and gather information about a situation people want to change to define a simple problem that can be solved through the development of a new or improved object or tool.
Evaluate multiple design solutions to prevent erosion (2-S.1)
Design knee pads (2-S.)
K-2-ETS1-2 Develop a simple sketch, drawing, or physical model to illustrate how the shape of an object helps it function as needed to solve a given problem.
Evaluate multiple design solutions to prevent erosion (2-S.1)
K-2-ETS1-3 Analyze data from tests of two objects designed to solve the same problem to compare the strengths and weaknesses of how each performs.
Evaluate multiple design solutions to prevent erosion (2-S.1)
Design knee pads (2-S.)