8.NS The Number System
Know that there are numbers that are not rational, and approximate them by rational numbers.
8.NS.1 Know that numbers that are not rational are called irrational. Understand informally that every number has a decimal expansion; for rational numbers show that the decimal expansion repeats eventually, and convert a decimal expansion which repeats eventually into a rational number.
Convert between repeating decimals and fractions (8-B.1)
Convert between decimals and fractions or mixed numbers (8-B.2)
Identify rational and irrational square roots (8-F.1)
Identify rational and irrational numbers (8-F.2)
8.NS.2 Use rational approximations of irrational numbers to compare the size of irrational numbers, locate them approximately on a number line diagram, and estimate the value of expressions (e.g., π²).
Estimate positive square roots (8-E.2)
Estimate positive and negative square roots (8-E.4)
Estimate cube roots (8-E.10)
Irrational numbers on number lines (8-F.4)
Compare and order rational and irrational numbers (8-F.5)
Checkpoint opportunity
Checkpoint: Rational and irrational numbers (8-F.6)
Checkpoint: Approximate irrational numbers (8-F.7)
8.EE Expressions and Equations
Work with radicals and integer exponents.
8.EE.1 Know and apply the properties of integer exponents to generate equivalent numerical expressions.
Powers with negative bases (8-C.4)
Understanding negative exponents (8-C.6)
Evaluate powers with negative exponents (8-C.7)
Evaluate powers with negative or zero exponents (8-C.8)
Multiply powers: integer bases (8-C.9)
Divide powers: integer bases (8-C.10)
Multiply and divide powers: integer bases (8-C.11)
Power of a power: integer bases (8-C.12)
Evaluate expressions using properties of exponents (8-C.13)
Identify equivalent expressions involving exponents I (8-C.14)
Identify equivalent expressions involving exponents II (8-C.15)
8.EE.2 Use square root and cube root symbols to represent solutions to equations of the form x² = p and x³ = p, where p is a positive rational number. Evaluate square roots of small perfect squares and cube roots of small perfect cubes. Know that √2 is irrational.
Square roots of perfect squares (8-E.1)
Positive and negative square roots (8-E.3)
Relationship between squares and square roots (8-E.5)
Solve equations using square roots (8-E.6)
Cube roots of positive perfect cubes (8-E.7)
Solve equations using cube roots (8-E.9)
Identify rational and irrational square roots (8-F.1)
8.EE.3 Use numbers expressed in the form of a single digit times an integer power of 10 to estimate very large or very small quantities, and to express how many times as much one is than the other.
Convert between standard and scientific notation (8-D.1)
Compare numbers written in scientific notation (8-D.3)
8.EE.4 Perform operations with numbers expressed in scientific notation, including problems where both decimal and scientific notation are used. Use scientific notation and choose units of appropriate size for measurements of very large or very small quantities (e.g., use millimeters per year for seafloor spreading). Interpret scientific notation that has been generated by technology.
Scientific notation on calculators (8-D.2)
Add and subtract numbers written in scientific notation (8-D.4)
Multiply numbers written in scientific notation (8-D.5)
Divide numbers written in scientific notation (8-D.6)
Add, subtract, multiply, and divide numbers written in scientific notation: word problems (8-D.)
Checkpoint opportunity
Checkpoint: Properties of exponents (8-C.20)
Checkpoint: Scientific notation (8-D.7)
Checkpoint: Square and cube roots (8-E.11)
Understand the connections between proportional relationships, lines, and linear equations.
8.EE.5 Graph proportional relationships, interpreting the unit rate as the slope of the graph. Compare two different proportional relationships represented in different ways.
Find the constant of proportionality from a graph (8-X.4)
Graph proportional relationships and find the slope (8-X.9)
Compare proportional relationships represented in different ways (8-X.12)
8.EE.6 Use similar triangles to explain why the slope m is the same between any two distinct points on a non-vertical line in the coordinate plane; derive the equation y = mx for a line through the origin and the equationy = mx + b for a line intercepting the vertical axis at b.
Find the slope from a graph (8-Z.1)
Find the slope from two points (8-Z.2)
Find a missing coordinate using slope (8-Z.4)
Graph a line using slope (8-Z.5)
Slope-intercept form: find the slope and y-intercept (8-AA.3)
Graph a line from an equation in slope-intercept form (8-AA.4)
Write a linear equation from a graph (8-AA.7)
Checkpoint opportunity
Checkpoint: Proportional relationships (8-X.13)
Checkpoint: Slope and linear equations (8-AA.15)
Analyze and solve linear equations and pairs of simultaneous linear equations.
8.EE.7 Solve linear equations in one variable.
8.EE.7.a Give examples of linear equations in one variable with one solution, infinitely many solutions, or no solutions. Show which of these possibilities is the case by successively transforming the given equation into simpler forms, until an equivalent equation of the form x = a, a = a, or a = b results (where a and b are different numbers).
Find the number of solutions (8-M.20)
Create equations with no solutions or infinitely many solutions (8-M.21)
8.EE.7.b Solve linear equations with rational number coefficients, including equations whose solutions require expanding expressions using the distributive property and collecting like terms.
Which x satisfies an equation? (8-M.1)
Solve equations involving like terms (8-M.11)
Solve equations with variables on both sides (8-M.12)
Solve equations with variables on both sides: fractional coefficients (8-M.13)
Solve equations with variables on both sides: word problems (8-M.14)
Solve equations using the distributive property (8-M.15)
Solve multi-step equations (8-M.16)
Solve multi-step equations with fractional coefficients (8-M.17)
Solve equations: mixed review (8-M.18)
Solve multi-step equations: complete the solution (8-M.19)
8.EE.8 Analyze and solve pairs of simultaneous linear equations.
8.EE.8.a Understand that solutions to a system of two linear equations in two variables correspond to points of intersection of their graphs, because points of intersection satisfy both equations simultaneously.
Is (x, y) a solution to the system of equations? (8-GG.1)
Solve a system of equations by graphing (8-GG.2)
Find the number of solutions to a system of equations by graphing (8-GG.4)
8.EE.8.b Solve systems of two linear equations in two variables algebraically, and estimate solutions by graphing the equations. Solve simple cases by inspection.
Find the number of solutions to a system of equations (8-GG.5)
Solve a system of equations using substitution (8-GG.8)
Solve a system of equations using elimination (8-GG.10)
Solve a system of equations using any method (8-GG.12)
8.EE.8.c Solve real-world and mathematical problems leading to two linear equations in two variables.
Solve a system of equations by graphing: word problems (8-GG.3)
Solve a system of equations using substitution: word problems (8-GG.9)
Solve a system of equations using elimination: word problems (8-GG.11)
Solve a system of equations using any method: word problems (8-GG.13)
Checkpoint opportunity
Checkpoint: Solve linear equations (8-M.22)
Checkpoint: Systems of equations (8-GG.14)
8.F Functions
Define, evaluate, and compare functions.
8.F.1 Understand that a function is a rule that assigns to each input exactly one output. The graph of a function is the set of ordered pairs consisting of an input and the corresponding output.
Interpret graphs of proportional relationships (8-X.10)
Is (x, y) a solution to the linear equation? (8-AA.1)
Identify functions (8-BB.1)
Identify functions: graphs (8-BB.2)
Find values using function graphs (8-BB.4)
Complete a table for a function graph (8-BB.5)
Evaluate a linear function (8-CC.1)
Complete a table for a linear function (8-CC.2)
Complete a table and graph a linear function (8-CC.3)
Interpret points on the graph of a linear function (8-CC.4)
8.F.2 Compare properties of two functions each represented in a different way (algebraically, graphically, numerically in tables, or by verbal descriptions).
Compare linear functions: graphs and equations (8-CC.9)
Compare linear functions: tables, graphs, and equations (8-CC.10)
8.F.3 Interpret the equation y = mx + b as defining a linear function, whose graph is a straight line; give examples of functions that are not linear.
Graph a line from an equation in slope-intercept form (8-AA.4)
Identify linear and nonlinear functions: graphs and equations (8-DD.1)
Identify linear and nonlinear functions: tables (8-DD.2)
Checkpoint opportunity
Checkpoint: Understand functions (8-BB.7)
Checkpoint: Compare linear functions (8-CC.14)
Checkpoint: Linear and nonlinear functions (8-DD.5)
Use functions to model relationships between quantities.
8.F.4 Construct a function to model a linear relationship between two quantities. Determine the rate of change and initial value of the function from a description of a relationship or from two (x, y) values, including reading these from a table or from a graph. Interpret the rate of change and initial value of a linear function in terms of the situation it models, and in terms of its graph or a table of values.
Write equations for proportional relationships from tables (8-X.2)
Write equations for proportional relationships from graphs (8-X.5)
Find the slope from a graph (8-Z.1)
Find the slope from two points (8-Z.2)
Find the slope from a table (8-Z.3)
Graph a line using slope (8-Z.5)
Slope-intercept form: find the slope and y-intercept (8-AA.3)
Write a linear equation from a slope and y-intercept (8-AA.6)
Write a linear equation from a graph (8-AA.7)
Write a linear equation from a slope and a point (8-AA.8)
Write a linear equation from two points (8-AA.9)
Rate of change of a linear function: tables (8-CC.5)
Rate of change of a linear function: graphs (8-CC.6)
Interpret the slope and y-intercept of a linear function (8-CC.7)
Write a linear function from a table (8-CC.8)
Write linear functions: word problems (8-CC.11)
8.F.5 Describe qualitatively the functional relationship between two quantities by analyzing a graph (e.g., where the function is increasing or decreasing, linear or nonlinear). Sketch a graph that exhibits the qualitative features of a function that has been described verbally.
Identify graphs: word problems (8-EE.3)
Checkpoint opportunity
Checkpoint: Construct and interpret linear functions (8-CC.13)
Checkpoint: Sketch and describe graphs (8-EE.4)
8.G Geometry
Understand congruence and similarity using physical models, transparencies, or geometry software.
8.G.1 Verify experimentally the properties of rotations, reflections, and translations:
8.G.1.a Lines are taken to lines, and line segments to line segments of the same length.
Identify reflections, rotations, and translations (8-R.1)
Translations: graph the image (8-R.3)
Reflections over the x- and y-axes: graph the image (8-R.6)
Reflections: graph the image (8-R.8)
Rotations: graph the image (8-R.10)
8.G.1.b Angles are taken to angles of the same measure.
Identify reflections, rotations, and translations (8-R.1)
Translations: graph the image (8-R.3)
Reflections over the x- and y-axes: graph the image (8-R.6)
Reflections: graph the image (8-R.8)
Rotations: graph the image (8-R.10)
8.G.1.c Parallel lines are taken to parallel lines.
Identify reflections, rotations, and translations (8-R.1)
Translations: graph the image (8-R.3)
Reflections over the x- and y-axes: graph the image (8-R.6)
Reflections: graph the image (8-R.8)
Rotations: graph the image (8-R.10)
8.G.2 Understand that a two-dimensional figure is congruent to another if the second can be obtained from the first by a sequence of rotations, reflections, and translations; given two congruent figures, describe a sequence that exhibits the congruence between them.
Describe a sequence of transformations (8-R.2)
Describe transformations (8-R.13)
Sequences of congruence transformations: choose the sequence (8-R.15)
Identify congruent figures (8-R.16)
Congruence statements and corresponding parts (8-R.17)
Determine if two figures are congruent: justify your answer (8-R.18)
Side lengths and angle measures of congruent figures (8-R.19)
8.G.3 Describe the effect of dilations, translations, rotations, and reflections on two-dimensional figures using coordinates.
Translations: graph the image (8-R.3)
Translations: find the coordinates (8-R.4)
Translations: write the rule (8-R.5)
Reflections over the x- and y-axes: find the coordinates (8-R.7)
Reflections: graph the image (8-R.8)
Reflections: find the coordinates (8-R.9)
Rotations: graph the image (8-R.10)
Rotations: find the coordinates (8-R.11)
Reflections and rotations: write the rule (8-R.12)
Describe transformations (8-R.13)
Sequences of congruence transformations: graph the image (8-R.14)
Dilations: graph the image (8-S.2)
Dilations: find the coordinates (8-S.3)
Dilations: write the rule (8-S.)
8.G.4 Understand that a two-dimensional figure is similar to another if the second can be obtained from the first by a sequence of rotations, reflections, translations, and dilations; given two similar two-dimensional figures, describe a sequence that exhibits the similarity between them.
Similar and congruent figures (8-S.1)
Side lengths and angle measures of similar figures (8-S.8)
Determine if two figures are similar: justify your answer (8-S.9)
8.G.5 Use informal arguments to establish facts about the angle sum and exterior angle of triangles, about the angles created when parallel lines are cut by a transversal, and the angle-angle criterion for similarity of triangles.
Identify alternate interior and alternate exterior angles (8-P.4)
Transversals of parallel lines: name angle pairs (8-P.5)
Transversals of parallel lines: find angle measures (8-P.6)
Transversals of parallel lines: solve for x (8-P.7)
Find missing angles in triangles (8-Q.7)
Find missing angles in triangles using ratios (8-Q.8)
Triangle Angle-Sum Theorem (8-Q.9)
Exterior Angle Theorem (8-Q.12)
Angle-angle criterion for similar triangles (8-S.6)
Checkpoint opportunity
Checkpoint: Triangles and transversals (8-Q.15)
Checkpoint: Congruence transformations (8-R.20)
Checkpoint: Similarity transformations (8-S.12)
Checkpoint: Transformations on the coordinate plane (8-S.13)
Understand and apply the Pythagorean Theorem.
8.G.6 Explain a proof of the Pythagorean Theorem and its converse.
Converse of the Pythagorean theorem: is it a right triangle? (8-T.6)
8.G.7 Apply the Pythagorean Theorem to determine unknown side lengths in right triangles in real-world and mathematical problems in two and three dimensions.
Pythagorean theorem: find the length of the hypotenuse (8-T.1)
Pythagorean theorem: find the missing leg length (8-T.2)
Pythagorean theorem: find the missing leg or hypotenuse length (8-T.3)
Pythagorean theorem: find the perimeter (8-T.4)
Pythagorean theorem: word problems (8-T.5)
8.G.8 Apply the Pythagorean Theorem to find the distance between two points in a coordinate system.
Find the distance between two points (8-O.4)
Checkpoint opportunity
Checkpoint: Pythagorean theorem and its converse (8-T.7)
Checkpoint: Applications of the Pythagorean theorem (8-T.8)
Solve real-world and mathematical problems involving volume of cylinders, cones, and spheres.
8.G.9 Know the formulas for the volumes of cones, cylinders, and spheres and use them to solve real-world and mathematical problems.
Volume of cylinders (8-W.3)
Volume of cones (8-W.4)
Volume of spheres (8-W.7)
Checkpoint opportunity
Checkpoint: Volume (8-W.10)
8.SP Statistics and Probability
Investigate patterns of association in bivariate data.
8.SP.1 Construct and interpret scatter plots for bivariate measurement data to investigate patterns of association between two quantities. Describe patterns such as clustering, outliers, positive or negative association, linear association, and nonlinear association.
Interpret scatter plots (8-II.3)
Create scatter plots (8-II.4)
Identify trends with scatter plots (8-II.5)
Outliers in scatter plots (8-II.7)
8.SP.2 Know that straight lines are widely used to model relationships between two quantitative variables. For scatter plots that suggest a linear association, informally fit a straight line, and informally assess the model fit by judging the closeness of the data points to the line.
Identify lines of best fit (8-II.8)
Write equations for lines of best fit (8-II.9)
8.SP.3 Use the equation of a linear model to solve problems in the context of bivariate measurement data, interpreting the slope and intercept.
Interpret lines of best fit: word problems (8-II.10)
8.SP.4 Understand that patterns of association can also be seen in bivariate categorical data by displaying frequencies and relative frequencies in a two-way table. Construct and interpret a two-way table summarizing data on two categorical variables collected from the same subjects. Use relative frequencies calculated for rows or columns to describe possible association between the two variables.
Create and interpret two-way frequency tables (8-II.)
Checkpoint opportunity
Checkpoint: Scatter plots (8-II.12)
Checkpoint: Lines of best fit (8-II.13)
Checkpoint: Linear models: interpret and solve (8-II.14)
Checkpoint: Two-way frequency tables (8-JJ.11)