Families Today and in the Past
2.1 Students differentiate between things that happened long ago and things that happened yesterday.
1 Trace the history of a family through the use of primary and secondary sources, including artifacts, photographs, interviews, and documents.
2 Compare and contrast their daily lives with those of their parents, grandparents, and/or guardians.
Then and now: transportation and communication (2)
Then and now: home and school (2)
Then and now: work and play (2)
3 Place important events in their lives in the order in which they occurred (e.g., on a time line or storyboard).
Geography and Mapping Skills
2.2 Students demonstrate map skills by describing the absolute and relative locations of people, places, and environments.
1 Locate on a simple letter-number grid system the specific locations and geographic features in their neighborhood or community (e.g., map of the classroom, the school).
Read a letter-number grid (2-A.1)
Use a letter-number grid (2-A.2)
2 Label from memory a simple map of the North American continent, including the countries, oceans, Great Lakes, major rivers, and mountain ranges. Identify the essential map elements: title, legend, directional indicator, scale, and date.
Identify oceans and continents (2-B.3)
Select oceans and continents (2-B.4)
Name oceans and continents (2-B.5)
3 Locate on a map where their ancestors live(d), telling when the family moved to the local community and how and why they made the trip.
4 Compare and contrast basic land use in urban, suburban, and rural environments in California.
Identify urban, suburban, and rural areas (2-C.2)
Compare urban, suburban, and rural areas (2-C.3)
Government Institutions and Practices
2.3 Students explain governmental institutions and practices in the United States and other countries.
1 Explain how the United States and other countries make laws, carry out laws, determine whether laws have been violated, and punish wrongdoers.
Purpose of government (2-D.1)
Local government (2-D.2)
State government (2-D.3)
Federal government (2-D.4)
2 Describe the ways in which groups and nations interact with one another to try to resolve problems in such areas as trade, cultural contacts, treaties, diplomacy, and military force.
Economics
2.4 Students understand basic economic concepts and their individual roles in the economy and demonstrate basic economic reasoning skills.
1 Describe food production and consumption long ago and today, including the roles of farmers, processors, distributors, weather, and land and water resources.
John Deere (2-H.6)
2 Understand the role and interdependence of buyers (consumers) and sellers (producers) of goods and services.
Producers and consumers (2-F.4)
3 Understand how limits on resources affect production and consumption (what to produce and what to consume).
Understand overall supply and demand (3-I.2)
Biographies of People Who Made a Difference
2.5 Students understand the importance of individual action and character and explain how heroes from long ago and the recent past have made a difference in others' lives (e.g., from biographies of Abraham Lincoln, Louis Pasteur, Sitting Bull, Ge
orge Washington Carver, Marie Curie, Albert Einstein, Golda Meir, Jackie Robinson, Sally Ride).
Benjamin Franklin (2-H.1)
Paul Revere (2-H.3)
Thomas Jefferson (2-H.4)
Davy Crockett (2-H.5)
Abraham Lincoln (2-H.7)
Frederick Douglass (2-H.8)
Harriet Tubman (2-H.9)
Susan B. Anthony (2-H.10)
Sitting Bull (2-H.11)
Thomas Edison (2-H.12)
Theodore Roosevelt (2-H.13)
George Washington Carver (2-H.14)
Amelia Earhart (2-H.15)
Thurgood Marshall (2-H.16)
Rosa Parks (2-H.17)
Jackie Robinson (2-H.18)
Martin Luther King Jr. (2-H.19)
Neil Armstrong (2-H.20)
Bill Gates (2-H.21)