Physical and Human Geographic Features That Define California
4.1 Students demonstrate an understanding of the physical and human geographic features that define places and regions in California.
1 Explain and use the coordinate grid system of latitude and longitude to determine the absolute locations of places in California and on Earth.
Identify lines of latitude and longitude (4-I.2)
Use lines of latitude and longitude (4-I.3)
2 Distinguish between the North and South Poles; the equator and the prime meridian; the tropics; and the hemispheres, using coordinates to plot locations.
Identify lines of latitude and longitude (4-I.2)
3 Identify the state capital and describe the various regions of California, including how their characteristics and physical environments (e.g., water, landforms, vegetation, climate) affect human activity.
Identify state capitals of the West (4-M.1)
Name state capitals of the West (4-M.2)
4 Identify the locations of the Pacific Ocean, rivers, valleys, and mountain passes and explain their effects on the growth of towns.
Identify oceans and continents (4-J.3)
Select oceans and continents (4-J.4)
Name oceans and continents (4-J.5)
5 Use maps, charts, and pictures to describe how communities in California vary in land use, vegetation, wildlife, climate, population density, architecture, services, and transportation.
California history: pre-Columbian settlements to the present
4.2 Students describe the social, political, cultural, and economic life and interactions among people of California from the pre-Columbian societies to the Spanish mission and Mexican rancho periods.
Skills covering this topic are not currently available on IXL.
4.3 Students explain the economic, social, and political life in California from the establishment of the Bear Flag Republic through the Mexican-American War, the Gold Rush, and the granting of statehood.
Skills covering this topic are not currently available on IXL.
4.4 Students explain how California became an agricultural and industrial power, tracing the transformation of the California economy and its political and cultural development since the 1850s.
1 Understand the story and lasting influence of the Pony Express, Overland Mail Service, Western Union, and the building of the transcontinental railroad, including the contributions of Chinese workers to its construction.
2 Explain how the Gold Rush transformed the economy of California, including the types of products produced and consumed, changes in towns (e.g., Sacramento, San Francisco), and economic conflicts between diverse groups of people.
3 Discuss immigration and migration to California between 1850 and 1900, including the diverse composition of those who came; the countries of origin and their relative locations; and conflicts and accords among the diverse groups (e.g., the 1882 Chinese Exclusion Act).
4 Describe rapid American immigration, internal migration, settlement, and the growth of towns and cities (e.g., Los Angeles).
5 Discuss the effects of the Great Depression, the Dust Bowl, and World War II on California.
The Great Depression: part I (4-G.1)
The Great Depression: part II (4-G.2)
World War II: lead-up to war in Europe, Asia (4-H.1)
World War II: global events (4-H.2)
6 Describe the development and locations of new industries since the turn of the century, such as the aerospace industry, electronics industry, large-scale commercial agriculture and irrigation projects, the oil and automobile industries, communications and defense industries, and important trade links with the Pacific Basin.
7 Trace the evolution of California's water system into a network of dams, aqueducts, and reservoirs.
8 Describe the history and development of California's public education system, including universities and community colleges.
9 Analyze the impact of twentieth-century Californians on the nation's artistic and cultural development, including the rise of the entertainment industry (e.g., Louis B. Meyer, Walt Disney, John Steinbeck, Ansel Adams, Dorothea Lange, John Wayne).
Local, State, and Federal Governments
4.5 Students understand the structures, functions, and powers of the local, state, and federal governments as described in the U.S. Constitution.
1 Discuss what the U.S. Constitution is and why it is important (i.e., a written document that defines the structure and purpose of the U.S. government and describes the shared powers of federal, state, and local governments).
The Constitution (4-O.4)
The Bill of Rights (4-O.5)
2 Understand the purpose of the California Constitution, its key principles, and its relationship to the U.S. Constitution.
3 Describe the similarities (e.g., written documents, rule of law, consent of the governed, three separate branches) and differences (e.g., scope of jurisdiction, limits on government powers, use of the military) among federal, state, and local governments.
Local government (4-O.1)
State government (4-O.2)
Federal government (4-O.3)
Checks and balances (4-O.6)
4 Explain the structures and functions of state governments, including the roles and responsibilities of their elected officials.
State government (4-O.2)
5 Describe the components of California's governance structure (e.g., cities and towns, Indian rancherias and reservations, counties, school districts).