Geography of the Local Region
3.1 Students describe the physical and human geography and use maps, tables, graphs, photographs, and charts to organize information about people, places, and environments in a spatial context.
1 Identify geographical features in their local region (e.g., deserts, mountains, valleys, hills, coastal areas, oceans, lakes).
Introduction to Earth's land features (3-B.1)
Identify Earth's land features using photographs (3-B.2)
2 Trace the ways in which people have used the resources of the local region and modified the physical environment (e.g., a dam constructed upstream changed a river or coastline).
American Indians of the Local Region
3.2 Students describe the American Indian nations in their local region long ago and in the recent past.
1 Describe national identities, religious beliefs, customs, and various folklore traditions.
Thanksgiving (3-J.10)
2 Discuss the ways in which physical geography, including climate, influenced how the local Indian nations adapted to their natural environment (e.g., how they obtained food, clothing, tools).
3 Describe the economy and systems of government, particularly those with tribal constitutions, and their relationship to federal and state governments.
4 Discuss the interaction of new settlers with the already established Indians of the region.
Development of the Local Community
3.3 Students draw from historical and community resources to organize the sequence of local historical events and describe how each period of settlement left its mark on the land.
1 Research the explorers who visited here, the newcomers who settled here, and the people who continue to come to the region, including their cultural and religious traditions and contributions.
2 Describe the economies established by settlers and their influence on the present-day economy, with emphasis on the importance of private property and entrepreneurship.
3 Trace why their community was established, how individuals and families contributed to its founding and development, and how the community has changed over time, drawing on maps, photographs, oral histories, letters, newspapers, and other primary sources.
American Citizens, Symbols, and Government
3.4 Students understand the role of rules and laws in our daily lives and the basic structure of the U.S. government.
1 Determine the reasons for rules, laws, and the U.S. Constitution; the role of citizenship in the promotion of rules and laws; and the consequences for people who violate rules and laws.
Purpose of government (3-F.1)
The Constitution (3-F.5)
2 Discuss the importance of public virtue and the role of citizens, including how to participate in a classroom, in the community, and in civic life.
Presidential elections (3-F.8)
3 Know the histories of important local and national landmarks, symbols, and essential documents that create a sense of community among citizens and exemplify cherished ideals (e.g., the U.S. flag, the bald eagle, the Statue of Liberty, the U.S. Constitution, the Declaration of Independence, the U.S. Capitol).
The Constitution (3-F.5)
Identify American symbols (3-G.1)
Identify American landmarks and monuments: part I (3-G.2)
Identify American landmarks and monuments: part II (3-G.3)
The American flag (3-G.4)
The White House (3-G.5)
The Washington Monument (3-G.6)
The Lincoln Memorial (3-G.7)
The Statue of Liberty (3-G.8)
The Empire State Building (3-G.9)
The Golden Gate Bridge (3-G.10)
Mount Rushmore (3-G.11)
4 Understand the three branches of government, with an emphasis on local government.
Local government (3-F.2)
State government (3-F.3)
Federal government (3-F.4)
Checks and balances (3-F.7)
5 Describe the ways in which California, the other states, and sovereign American Indian tribes contribute to the making of our nation and participate in the federal system of government.
Presidential elections (3-F.8)
6 Describe the lives of American heroes who took risks to secure our freedoms (e.g., Anne Hutchinson, Benjamin Franklin, Thomas Jefferson, Abraham Lincoln, Frederick Douglass, Harriet Tubman, Martin Luther King, Jr.).
Benjamin Franklin (3-K.1)
Paul Revere (3-K.3)
Thomas Jefferson (3-K.4)
Davy Crockett (3-K.5)
Abraham Lincoln (3-K.7)
Frederick Douglass (3-K.8)
Harriet Tubman (3-K.9)
Susan B. Anthony (3-K.10)
Thurgood Marshall (3-K.16)
Rosa Parks (3-K.17)
Jackie Robinson (3-K.18)
Martin Luther King Jr. (3-K.19)
Economics of the Local Region
3.5 Students demonstrate basic economic reasoning skills and an understanding of the economy of the local region.
1 Describe the ways in which local producers have used and are using natural resources, human resources, and capital resources to produce goods and services in the past and the present.
What is economics? (3-H.1)
Natural resources (3-H.3)
Goods and services (3-H.4)
2 Understand that some goods are made locally, some elsewhere in the United States, and some abroad.
3 Understand that individual economic choices involve trade-offs and the evaluation of benefits and costs.
What is economics? (3-H.1)
4 Discuss the relationship of students' "work" in school and their personal human capital.