Citizenship
1.1 Students describe the rights and individual responsibilities of citizenship.
1 Understand the rule-making process in a direct democracy (everyone votes on the rules) and in a representative democracy (an elected group of people make the rules), giving examples of both systems in their classroom, school, and community.
Rules and laws (1-A.1)
2 Understand the elements of fair play and good sportsmanship, respect for the rights and opinions of others, and respect for rules by which we live, including the meaning of the "Golden Rule."
Rules and laws (1-A.1)
Good citizenship (1-A.4)
Geography and Mapping Skills
1.2 Students compare and contrast the absolute and relative locations of places and people and describe the physical and/or human characteristics of places.
1 Locate on maps and globes their local community, California, the United States, the seven continents, and the four oceans.
Introduction to maps (1-I.1)
Use cardinal directions (1-I.2)
Use maps of the community (1-I.4)
2 Compare the information that can be derived from a three-dimensional model to the information that can be derived from a picture of the same location.
3 Construct a simple map, using cardinal directions and map symbols.
Introduction to maps (1-I.1)
Use cardinal directions (1-I.2)
Use a map key (1-I.3)
Use maps of the community (1-I.4)
4 Describe how location, weather, and physical environment affect the way people live, including the effects on their food, clothing, shelter, transportation, and recreation.
Compare cities and rural areas (1-C.4)
Identify Earth's land features (1-G.1)
Identify Earth's water features (1-G.2)
Identify human and physical features (1-G.3)
American Symbols, Landmarks, and Traditions
1.3 Students know and understand the symbols, icons, and traditions of the United States that provide continuity and a sense of community across time.
1 Recite the Pledge of Allegiance and sing songs that express American ideals (e.g., "My Country 'Tis of Thee").
Pledge of Allegiance (1-B.4)
2 Understand the significance of our national holidays and the heroism and achievements of the people associated with them.
Independence Day (1-D.6)
Martin Luther King Jr. Day (1-D.9)
Memorial Day (1-D.10)
George Washington (1-F.1)
Abraham Lincoln (1-F.2)
3 Identify American symbols, landmarks, and essential documents, such as the flag, bald eagle, Statue of Liberty, U.S. Constitution, and Declaration of Independence, and know the people and events associated with them.
Identify American symbols (1-B.1)
Identify American landmarks and monuments (1-B.2)
The American flag (1-B.3)
Continuity and change
1.4 Students compare and contrast everyday life in different times and places around the world and recognize that some aspects of people, places, and things change over time while others stay the same.
1 Examine the structure of schools and communities in the past.
Then and now: home and school (1-E.2)
2 Study transportation methods of earlier days.
Then and now: transportation and communication (1-E.1)
3 Recognize similarities and differences of earlier generations in such areas as work (inside and outside the home), dress, manners, stories, games, and festivals, drawing from biographies, oral histories, and folklore.
Then and now: work and play (1-E.3)
Community and Cultural Connections
1.5 Students describe the human characteristics of familiar places and the varied backgrounds of American citizens and residents in those places.
1 Recognize the ways in which they are all part of the same community, sharing principles, goals, and traditions despite their varied ancestry; the forms of diversity in their school and community; and the benefits and challenges of a diverse population.
What is a community? (1-C.1)
Tools community helpers use (1-C.3)
Compare cities and rural areas (1-C.4)
2 Understand the ways in which American Indians and immigrants have helped define Californian and American culture.
3 Compare the beliefs, customs, ceremonies, traditions, and social practices of the varied cultures, drawing from folklore.
Christmas (1-D.1)
Día de los Muertos (1-D.2)
Easter (1-D.3)
Hanukkah (1-D.4)
Holi (1-D.5)
Kwanzaa (1-D.7)
Lunar New Year (1-D.8)
Ramadan (1-D.12)
Rosh Hashanah (1-D.13)
Thanksgiving (1-D.14)
Economics
1.6 Students understand basic economic concepts and the role of individual choice in a free-market economy.
1 Understand the concept of exchange and the use of money to purchase goods and services.
Goods and services (1-J.3)
2 Identify the specialized work that people do to manufacture, transport, and market goods and services and the contributions of those who work in the home.
Jobs community helpers do (1-C.2)
Goods and services (1-J.3)
Producers and consumers (1-J.4)
Natural resources (1-J.5)